>> Pedram, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
It's amazing to have you here.
>> Michael, great to be here.
>> Yeah. We're going to talk about data,
data pipelines, automation.
Boy, let me tell you,
have I been in the DevOps side of things this week.
I'm going to have a special appreciation of it,
I can tell already.
>> I could almost.
>> Indeed. Before we get to that though,
before we talk about Dagster and
data pipelines and orchestration more broadly,
let's just get a little bit of background on you.
Introduce yourself for people.
How did you get into Python and
data orchestration and all those things?
>> Of course. My name is Pedram Naveed.
I'm the head of Data Engineering and DevRel at Dagster,
that's a mouthful.
I've been a long-time Python user since 2.7.
I got started with Python like I do with many things,
just out of sheer laziness.
I was working at a bank and there was this rote task,
something involving going into servers,
opening up a text file and seeing if
a patch was applied to a server.
A nightmare scenario when there's
a 100 servers to check and 15 different patches to confirm.
>> Yeah. This predates like
the Cloud and all that automation stuff, right?
>> This is definitely before Cloud.
This was right between Python 2 and
Python 3 and we were trying to figure
out how to use print statements correctly.
That's when I learned Python. I was like,
there's got to be a better way and honestly,
I've not looked back. I think if you look at
my entire career trajectory,
you'll see it's just punctuated by
finding ways to be more lazy in many ways.
>> Yeah. Who was it?
I think it was Matthew Rocklin that had the phrase
something like productive laziness or something like that.
I'm going to find a way to leverage my laziness,
to force me to build automation so
I never ever have to do this thing again.
I got that sort of print.
>> It's very motivating to not have to do
something and I'll do anything to not do something.
>> Yeah. It's incredible.
Like that DevOps stuff I was talking about,
just one command and there's
maybe eight or nine new apps with all their tiers,
redeployed, updated, resynced.
It took me a lot of work to get there.
But now, I never have to think about it again,
at least not for a few years and it's amazing.
I can just be productive. It's right in line with that.
What are some of the Python projects you've worked on,
talked about different ways to apply this over the years?
>> Yeah. It started with internal,
just like Python projects,
trying to automate, like I said,
some rote tasks that I had and that accidentally becomes
a bigger project people see it and they're like, "Oh,
I want that too." Well, now I have to build
a GUI interface because most people don't speak Python.
That got me into PyGUI,
I think it was called way back when.
That was a fun journey.
Then from there, it's really taken off.
A lot of it has been mostly personal projects,
trying to understand open source was
a really big learning path for me as well.
Really being absorbed by things like
SQLAlchemy and requests back when they were coming out.
Eventually, it led to more of a data engineering type of role,
where I got involved with tools like Airflow and try to
automate data pipelines instead of patches on a server.
That one day led to,
I guess, making a long story short,
a role at Daxter where now I contribute a little bit to Daxter.
I work on Daxter, the core project itself,
but I also use Daxter internally to build our own data pipelines.
>> I'm sure it's interesting to see how you
all both build Daxter and then consume Daxter.
>> Yeah, it's been wonderful.
I think there's a lot of great things about it.
One is getting access to Daxter before it's fully released.
Internally, we dog food,
new features, new concepts,
and we work with the product team,
the engineering team to say, "Hey, this makes sense.
This doesn't, this works really well, that doesn't."
That feedback loop is so fast and so iterative that for me personally,
being able to see that come to fruition,
it's really, really compelling.
But at the same time, I get to work at a place that's building a tool for me.
You don't often get that luxury.
I've worked in ads,
I've worked in insurance,
it's like banking, it's like these are nice things,
but it's not built for me.
For me, that's probably been the biggest benefit, I would say.
>> If you work in some marketing thing,
you're like, "I retargeted myself so well today.
You wouldn't believe it. I really enjoyed it."
>> I've seen ads that I've created before.
It's a little fun, but it's not the same.
>> Yeah. I've heard of people who are really,
really good at ad targeting and finding groups where
they prank their wife or something or just had
an ad that would only show up for their wife by running.
It was so specific and freaked them out a little bit.
>> Yeah, that's pretty clever.
>> Yeah, maybe it wasn't appreciated, but it is clever.
>> Who knows? All right.
Well, before we jump in,
you said that of course you built GUIs with PyGUI and those things
because people don't speak Python back then,
two, seven days and whatever. Is that different now?
Not that people speak Python,
but is it different in the sense that like, "Hey,
I could give them a Jupyter Notebook or I could give
them Streamlet or one of these things."
A little more or less you build in and just plug it in?
>> I think so. Like you said,
it's not different in that most people
probably still to this day don't speak Python.
>> Yeah.
>> I know we had this movement a little bit back where
everyone was going to learn SQL
and everyone was going to learn to code.
I was never that bullish on that trend because if I'm a marketing person,
I've got 10,000 things to do and
learning to code isn't going to be the priority ever.
I think building interfaces for people that are easy to
use and speaks well to them is always useful.
That never has gone away.
But I think the tooling around it has been better.
I don't think I'll ever want to use PyGUI again,
nothing wrong with the platform,
it's just not fun to write.
Streamlet makes it so easy to do that.
It's something like retool and there's like a thousand other ways now that you
can bring these tools in front of your stakeholders and
your users that just wasn't possible before.
>> I think it's a pretty exciting time.
There are a lot of pretty polished tools.
>> Yeah, it's gotten so good.
>> Yeah. There's some interesting ones like OpenBB,
do you know that? The financial dashboard thing.
>> I've heard of this, I haven't seen it.
>> Yeah, it's basically for traders,
but it's like a terminal type thing that has a bunch of
Matplotlib and other interactive stuff that pops up compared to say,
Bloomberg dashboard type things.
But yeah, that's one sense where maybe traders go and learn Python because it's like,
all right, there's enough value here.
But in general, I don't think people are
going to stop what they're doing and learning the code.
So these new UI things are not.
All right, let's dive in and talk about
this general category first of data pipelines,
data orchestration, all those things.
We'll talk about Daxter and some of the trends and that.
So I just grabbed some random Internet search for what does a data pipeline maybe look like?
But people out there listening who don't necessarily live in that space,
which I think is honestly many of us,
maybe we should, but maybe in our minds,
we don't think we live in data pipeline land.
Tell them about it.
>> Yeah, for sure. It is hard to think about if you haven't done or built one before.
But in many ways,
a data pipeline is just a series of steps that you apply to some dataset that you
have in order to transform it to something a little bit more valuable at the very end.
That's a simplified version.
The devil's in the details,
but really at the end of the day,
you're in a business,
the production of data happens by the very nature of operating that business.
It tends to be the core thing that all businesses have in common.
Then the other output is you have people within
a business who are trying to understand how the business is operating.
This used to be easy when all we had was a single spreadsheet that we could look at once a month.
I think businesses have gone a little bit more complex than these days.
>> Computers.
>> The expectations, they expect to be able to see almost real-time,
not I'll see it at the end of the month.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah.
>> I think people have gotten used to getting data too,
which is both good and bad.
Good in the sense that now people are making better decisions,
bad and then there's more work for us to do and we can't just sit on our feet
for half a day, half a month,
waiting for the next request to come in.
There's just an endless stream that seems to never end.
That's what really a pipeline is all about.
It's like taking these data and making it consumable in a way that users,
tools will understand that helps people make decisions at the very end of the day.
That's the nuts and bolts of it.
>> In your mind, does data acquisition live in this land?
For example, maybe we have a scheduled job that goes and does web scraping,
calls an API once an hour,
and that might kick off a whole pipeline of processing,
or we watch a folder for people to upload over FTP,
like a CSV file or something horrible like that.
You don't even want to speak, it's unspeakable.
But something like that where you say,
"Oh, a new CSV has arrived for me to get."
>> Yeah, I think that's the beginning of all data pipeline journeys in my mind.
Very much. An FTP, as much as we hate it, it's not terrible.
I mean, there are worse ways to transfer files.
But it's I think still very much in use today.
Every data pipeline journey at some point has to
begin with that consumption of data from somewhere.
>> Yeah. Hopefully, it's SFTP,
not just straight FTP, like the encrypted.
Don't just send your password in the plain text.
Well, I've seen that go wrong.
That's a story for another day, honestly.
Well, let's talk about the project that you work on.
We've been talking about it in general,
but let's talk about Dijkstra.
Where does it fit in this world?
>> Yes. Dijkstra to me is a way to build a data platform.
It's also a different way of
thinking about how you build data pipelines.
Maybe it's good to compare it with what the world was like,
I think before Dijkstra and how it came about to be.
If you think of Airflow,
I think it's probably the most canonical orchestrator out there.
But there are other ways which people
used to orchestrate these data pipelines.
They were often task-based.
I would download file,
I would unzip file,
I would upload file.
These are the words we use to describe
the various steps within a pipeline.
>> Some of those little steps might be
Python functions that you write,
maybe there's some pre-built other ones.
>> Yeah. They might be Python,
could be a batch script,
could be logging into a server and downloading a file,
could be hitting request to
download something from the Internet, unzipping it.
Just a various hodgepodge of commands that would run.
That's typically how we thought about it.
For more complex scenarios where your data is bigger,
maybe it's running against a Hadoop cluster or a Spark cluster.
The compute's been offloaded somewhere else.
But the conceptual way you
tended to think about these things is in terms of tasks.
Process this thing, do this massive data dump,
run a bunch of things,
and then your job is complete.
With Dagster, we flip it around a little bit on our heads and we say,
instead of thinking about tasks,
what if we flipped that around and thought about
the actual underlying assets that you're creating?
What if you told us not the steps that you're going to take,
but the thing that you produce?
Because it turns out as people and as data people and stakeholders,
really, we don't care about the task.
We just assume that you're going to do it.
What we care about is that table,
that model, that file,
that Jupyter Notebook.
If we model our pipeline through that,
then we get a whole bunch of other benefits.
That's the Dagster's pitch.
If you want to understand
the things that are being produced by these tasks,
tell us about the underlying assets.
Then when a stakeholder says and comes to you and says,
how old is this table?
Has it been refreshed lately?
Well, you don't have to go look at a specific task.
Remember that task ABC had model XYZ.
You just go and look up model XYZ directly there and it's there for you.
Because you've defined things in this way,
you get other nice things like a lineage graph.
You get to understand how fresh your data is.
You can do event-based orchestration and all kinds of
nice things that are a lot harder to do in a task world.
>> More declarative, less imperative, I suppose.
>> Yeah. It's been the trend.
I think in lots of tooling,
React, I think was famous for this as well in many ways.
It was a hard framework, I think,
for people to get their heads around initially,
because we were so used to the jQuery style of doing things.
>> Yeah. How do I hook the event that makes the thing happen?
>> React said, let's think about it a little bit differently.
Let's do this event-based orchestration.
I think the proofs in the pudding reacts
everywhere now and jQuery maybe not so much.
>> Yeah. There's still a lot of jQuery out there,
but there's not a lot of active jQuery.
But I imagine there's some.
>> There is.
>> Yeah. Just because people like,
you know what, don't touch that, that works.
>> Which is probably the smartest thing people can do,
I think, a lot of times.
>> Yeah. Honestly. Even though new frameworks are shiny.
If there's any ecosystem that loves to chase the shiny new idea,
it's the JavaScript web world.
>> Yeah. There's no shortage of new frameworks coming out every time.
>> I mean, we do too,
but not as much as like, that's six months old.
That's so old, we can't possibly do that anymore.
We're rewriting it. We're going to do the big rewrite again.
>> Yeah.
>> Fine. So Daxter is the company,
but also is open source.
What's the story around,
can I use it for free? Is it open source? Do I pay for it?
>> I understand.
>> Okay.
>> So Daxter Labs is the company,
Daxter open source is the product.
It's 100 percent free.
We're very committed to the open source model.
I would say 95 percent of the things you can get out of
Daxter are available through open source,
and we tend to try to release everything through that model.
You can run very complex pipelines,
and you can deploy it all on your own if you wish.
There is a Daxter Cloud product,
which is really the hosted version of Daxter.
If you want a hosted plane,
we can do that for you through Daxter Cloud.
But it all runs on the same code base,
and the modeling and the files all essentially look the same.
>> Okay. So obviously, you could get,
like I talked about at the beginning,
you could go down the DevOps side,
get your own open source Daxter setup,
schedule it, run it on servers, all those things.
But if we just wanted something real simple,
we could just go to you guys and say,
"Hey, I built this with Daxter.
Will you run it for me?"
>> Pretty much, yeah. So there's two options there.
You can do the serverless model,
which says, "Daxter, just run it.
We take care of the compute,
we take care of the execution for you,
and you just write the code and upload it to GitHub
or any repository of your choice,
and we'll sync to that and then run it."
The other option is to do a hybrid model.
>> Sorry. So you basically do the CI/CD aspect.
You just say, you push to name your branch.
If you push that branch, that means we're just going to
deploy a new version and whatever happens after that,
it'll be in production, right?
>> Exactly, yeah. We offer some templates that you can use in
GitHub for workflows in order to accommodate that.
>> Excellent. Then I cut you off,
you're saying something about hybrid.
>> Hybrid is the other option.
For those of you who want to run your own compute,
you don't want the data leaving your ecosystem,
you can say, "We've got this Kubernetes cluster,
this ECS cluster, but we still want to use
the Daxter Cloud product to manage the control plane.
Daxter Cloud will do that, and then you can go off and
execute things on your own environment
if that's something you wish to do.
>> Oh, yeah. That's pretty clever because
running stuff in containers isn't too bad,
but running container clusters,
all of a sudden, you're back doing a lot of work, right?
>> Exactly, yeah.
>> Yeah. Well, let's maybe talk
about Daxter for a bit,
then I want to talk about some of the trends as well.
But let's just talk through maybe setting up a pipeline.
What does it look like?
You talked about in general,
less imperative, more declarative,
but what does it look like?
Be careful about talking about code on audio,
but give us a sense of what
the programming model feels like for us.
>> As much as possible,
it really feels like just writing Python.
It's pretty easy.
You add a decorator on top
of your existing Python function that does something.
That's a simple decorator called asset,
and then your pipeline,
that function becomes a data asset.
That's how it's represented in the Daxter UI.
You could imagine you've got a pipeline
that gets maybe Slack analytics
and uploads that to some dashboard.
Your first pipeline, your function
will be called something like Slack data,
and that would be your asset.
In that function is where you do all the transform,
the downloading of the data,
until you've really created
that fundamental data asset that you care about.
That could be stored either in a data warehouse,
two or three, however you want to persist it,
that's really up to you.
Then the resources is where
the power I think of a lot of Daxter comes in.
The asset is declaration of the thing I'm going to create.
The resource is how I'm going to operate on that.
Because sometimes you might want to have a,
let's say a DuckDB instance locally
because it's easier and faster to operate.
But when you're moving to the Cloud,
you want to have a Databricks or a Snowflake.
You can swap out resources based on environments,
and your asset can reference that resource.
And as long as it has that same API,
you can really flexibly change
between where that data is going to be persistent.
- Does Daxter know how to talk to those different platforms?
Does it natively understand DuckDB and Snowflake?
- Yeah, so it's interesting.
People often look to Daxter and like,
"Oh, does it do X?"
And the question is like,
Daxter does anything you can do Python with.
- Most things, yeah.
- Which is most things.
So I think if you come from the Airflow world,
you're very much used to like these Airflow providers.
And if you want to use-
- That's kind of what I was thinking, yeah.
- Yeah, you want to use a Postgres,
you need to find the Postgres provider.
You want to use S3, you need to find S3 provider.
With Daxter, you kind of say,
you don't have to do any of that.
If you want to use Snowflake, for example,
you install the Snowflake connector package from Snowflake,
and you use that as a resource directly.
And then you just run your SQL that way.
There are some places where we do have integrations
that help if you want to get into the weeds
with I/O manager,
it's where we persist the data on your behalf.
And so for S3, for Snowflake, for example,
there's other ways where we can persist that data for you.
But if you're just trying to run a query,
just trying to execute something,
just trying to save something somewhere,
you don't have to use that system at all.
You can just use whatever Python package
you would use anyway to do that.
- So maybe some data is expensive
for us to get as a company,
like maybe we're charged on a usage basis
or super slow or something.
I could write just Python code that goes and say,
well, look in my local database.
If it's already there, use that and it's not too stale.
Otherwise, then do actually go get it,
put it there and then get it back.
And like that kind of stuff would be up to me to put together.
- Yeah, and that's the nice thing
is you're not really limited by like anyone's data model
or world view on how data should be retrieved
or saved or augmented.
You could do it a couple of ways.
You could say, whenever I'm working locally,
use this persistent data store
that we're just gonna use for development purposes.
- A fancy database called SQLite, something like that.
- Exactly, yes, a wonderful database.
- Actually, it's yeah.
- It'll work really, really well.
And then you just say, when I'm in a different environment,
when I'm in production, swap out my SQLite resource
for a, name your favorite cloud warehouse resource
and go fetch that data from there.
Or I wanna use a mini IO locally.
I wanna use S3 on prod.
It's very simple to swap these things out.
- Okay, yeah, so it looks like you build up these assets
as y'all call them, these pieces of data,
Python code that accesses them.
And then you have a nice UI that lets you go
and build those out kind of workflow style, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
This is where we get into the wonderful world of DAGs,
which stands for directed acyclic graph, I think.
It stands for a bunch of things
that are not connected in a circle,
but are connected in some way.
So there can't be any loops, right?
'Cause then you never know where to start or where to end.
- Could be a diamond, but not a circle, right?
- Not a circle.
As long as there's like a path through this dataset
where the beginning and an end,
then we can kind of start to model
this connected graph of things.
And then we know how to execute them, right?
We can say, well, this is the first thing we have to run
'cause that's where all dependencies start.
And then we can either branch off in parallel
or we can continue linearly until everything is complete.
And if something breaks in the middle,
we can resume from that broken spot.
- Okay, excellent.
And is that the recommended way?
Like if I write all this Python code
that works on the pieces,
then the next recommendation would be to fire up the UI
and start building it?
Or do you say, ah, you should really write it in code
and then you can just visualize it or monitor it?
- Everything in Dagster is written as code.
The UI reads that code and it interprets it as a DAG
and then it displays that for you.
There are some things you do with the UI,
like you can materialize assets, you can make them run,
you can do backfills, you can view metadata,
you can sort of enable and disable schedules.
But the core, we really believe this is Dagster,
like the core declaration of how things are done,
it's always done through code.
- Okay, excellent.
So when you say materialize, maybe I have an asset,
which is really a Python function I wrote
that goes and pulls down a CSV file.
The materialize would be,
I wanna see kind of representative data in this, in the UI.
And so I could go, all right, I think this is right,
let's keep passing it down.
Is that what that means?
- Materialize really means just run this particular asset,
make this asset new again, fresh again, right?
As part of that materialization,
we sometimes output metadata
and you can kind of see this on the right,
if you're looking at the screen here,
where we talk about what the timestamp was, the URL,
there's a nice little graph of like number of rows over time.
All that metadata is something you can emit
and we emit some ourselves by default with the framework.
And then as you materialize these assets,
as you run that asset over and over again, over time,
we capture all that and then you can really get
a nice overview of this assets lifetime, essentially.
- Nice.
I think the metadata is really pretty excellent, right?
Over time, you can see how the data's grown and changed.
- Yeah, the metadata is really powerful
and it's one of the nice benefits
of being in this asset world, right?
Because you don't really wanna metadata
on like this task that run,
you wanna know like this table that I created,
how many rows has it had every single time it's run?
And then that number drops by like 50%,
that's a big problem.
Conversely, if the runtime is slowly increasing
every single day, you might not notice it,
but over a month or two,
it went from a 30 second pipeline to 30 minutes,
maybe there's like a great place to start optimizing
that one specific asset.
- Right, and what's cool, if it's just Python code,
well, you know how to optimize that probably, right?
- Hopefully, yeah.
- Well, as much as you're gonna, yeah,
you have all the power of Python
and you should be able to,
as opposed to it's deep down inside some framework
that you don't really-- - Exactly.
- Yeah. - You use Python,
you can benchmark it,
there's probably, you probably knew,
you didn't write it that well when you first started
and you can always find ways to improve it.
- So this UI is something that you can just run locally,
kind of like Jupyter.
- 100%, just type docs or dev
and then you get the full UI experience,
you get to see the runs, all your assets.
- Is it a web app?
- It is, yeah.
It's a web app, there's a Postgres backend
and then there's a couple of services that run,
the web server, the GraphQL and then the workers.
- Nice, yeah, so pretty serious web app, it sounds like.
But you probably run it all. - Yeah, something like--
- Yeah, just something you run all,
probably containers or something,
then you just fire up when you download it, right?
- Locally, it doesn't even use containers,
it's just all pure Python for that.
But once you deploy, yeah,
I think you might wanna go down the container route.
But it's nice not having to have Docker
just to run a simple test deployment.
- Yeah, I guess not everyone's machine has that, for sure.
So question from the audience here, Jazzy asks,
does it hook into AWS in particular?
Is it compatible with existing pipelines
like ingestion Lambdas or transform Lambdas?
- Yeah, you can hook into AWS.
So we have some AWS integrations built in.
Like I mentioned before,
there's nothing stopping you from importing Boto3
and doing anything really you want.
So a very simple use case,
like let's say you already have an existing transformation
that's being triggered in AWS through some Lambda,
you could just model that within Dexter
and say, trigger that Lambda through Boto3.
And then the asset itself
is really that representation of that pipeline,
but you're not actually running that code
within Dexter itself,
that's still occurring on the AWS framework.
And that's a really simple way to start
adding a little bit of observability
and orchestration to existing pipelines.
- Okay, that's pretty cool
because now you have this nice UI
and these metadata and this history,
but it's someone else's cloud.
- Exactly, yeah.
- And you can start to pull more information in there
and over time you might decide,
this Lambda that I had, it's starting to get out of hand.
I wanna kind of break it apart into multiple assets
where I want to sort of optimize it
a little way and Dexter can help you along that.
- Well, yeah, excellent.
How do you set up like triggers
or observability inside Dexter?
Like Jazzy asked about S3,
but like in general, right?
If a row is entered into a database,
something is dropped in a blob storage
or the date changes, I don't know.
- Yeah, those are great questions.
So you have a lot of options.
In Dexter, we do model every asset
with a couple little flags, I think,
that are really useful to think about.
One is whether the code
of that particular asset has changed, right?
And then the other one is whether
anything upstream of that asset has changed.
And those two things really power a lot
of automation functionality that we can get downstream.
So let's start with, I think the S3 example
is the easiest to understand.
You have a bucket and there is a file
that gets uploaded every day.
You don't know what time that file gets uploaded.
You don't know when it'll be uploaded,
but you know, at some point it will be.
In Dexter, we have a thing called the sensor,
which you can just connect to an S3 location.
You can define how it looks into that file
or into that folder.
And then you would just pull every 30 seconds
until something happens.
When that something happens,
that triggers sort of an event.
And that event can trickle at your will,
downstream to everything that depends on it
as you sort of connect to these things.
So it gets you awake from this like,
oh, I'm gonna schedule something to run every hour.
Maybe the data will be there, but maybe it won't.
And you can have a much more event-based workflow.
When this file runs, I want everything downstream
to know that this data has changed.
And as sort of data flows through these systems,
everything will sort of work its way down.
- Yeah, I like it.
The sensor concept is really cool
because I'm sure that there's a ton of cloud machines
that people provisioned
just because this thing runs every 15 minutes,
that runs every 30 minutes,
and you add them up and in aggregate,
we need eight machines just to handle the automation
rather than, you know,
'cause they're hoping to catch something
without too much latency,
but maybe like that actually only changes once a week.
- Exactly.
And I think that's where we have to like sometimes
step away from the way we're so used to thinking
about things, and I'm guilty of this.
When I create a data pipeline,
my natural inclination is to create a schedule
where I can say, is this a daily one?
Is this weekly?
Is this monthly?
But what I'm finding more and more
is when I'm creating my pipelines,
I'm not adding a schedule.
I'm using Dagster's auto-materialized policies,
and I'm just telling it, you figure it out.
I don't have to think about schedules.
Just figure out when the things should be updated.
When it's, you know, parents have been updated, you run.
When the data has changed, you run.
And then just like figure it out and leave me alone.
- Yeah.
- And it's worked pretty well for me so far.
- I think it's great.
I have a search, refresh the search index
on the various podcast pages that runs,
and it runs every hour,
but the podcast ships weekly, right?
- Right.
- I don't know which hour it is,
and so it seems like that's enough latency,
but it would be way better
to put just a little bit of smarts,
like what was the last date that anything changed?
Was that since the last time you saw it?
Maybe we'll just leave that alone, you know?
But yeah, you're starting to inspire me
to go write more code, but pretty cool.
All right, so on the homepage at dagster.io,
you've got a nice graphic that shows you both
how to write the code, like some examples of the code,
as well as how that looks in the UI.
And one of them says to launch backfills.
What is this backfill thing?
- Oh, this is my favorite thing.
Okay. - Okay.
- So when you first start your data journey
as a data engineer, you sort of have a pipeline,
and you build it, and it just runs on a schedule,
and that's fine.
What you soon find is, you know,
you might have to go back in time, right?
You might say, "I've got this dataset that updates monthly."
Here's a great example, AWS Cost Reporting, right?
AWS will send you some data around, you know,
all your instances and your S3 bucket, all that,
and it'll update that data every day or every month
or whatever have you.
Due to some reason, you've got to go back in time
and refresh data that AWS updated
due to some, like, discrepancy.
Backfill is sort of how you do that,
and it works hand-in-hand with this idea of a partition.
A partition is sort of how your data is naturally organized,
and it's like a nice way to represent
that natural organization.
It has nothing to do with, like, the fundamental way,
how often you want to run it.
It's more around, like, I've got a dataset
that comes in once a month, it's represented monthly.
It might be updated daily, but it's the representation
of the data is monthly, so I will partition it by month.
It doesn't have to be dates.
It could be strings.
It could be a list.
You could have a partition for every, you know,
company or every client or, you know,
every domain you have,
whatever you sort of think is a natural way
to think about breaking apart that pipeline.
And once you do that partition,
you can do these nice things called backfills,
which says, instead of running this entire pipeline
and all my data, I want you to pick that one month
where your data went wrong
or that one month where data was missing
and just run the partition on that range.
And so you limit the compute, you save resources,
it's gonna be a little bit more efficient,
and it's just easier to, like,
think about your pipeline and stuff
because you've got this natural built-in
partitioning system.
- Excellent, so maybe you missed some important event.
Maybe your automation went down for a little bit,
came back up, you're like, oh no, we've missed it, right?
But you want to start over.
You don't want to start over.
- For like three years, so you're like,
maybe we could just go and run the last day.
It's worth it.
- Exactly.
Or another one would be your vendor says,
hey, by the way, we actually screwed up.
We uploaded this file from two months ago,
but the numbers were all wrong.
We've uploaded a new version to that destination.
Can you update your data set?
One way is to recompute the entire universe from scratch.
But if you've partitioned things,
then you can say, no, limit that to just this one partition
for that one.
And that one partition can trickle down all the way
to all your other assets that depend on that one.
- Do you have to pre decide,
you have to think about this partitioning beforehand
or can you do it retroactively?
- You can do it retroactively.
And I have done that before as well.
It really depends on where you're at.
I think if it's your first asset ever,
probably don't bother with partitions,
but it really isn't a lot of work to get them started.
- Okay.
Yeah, really neat.
I like a lot of the ideas here.
I like that it's got this visual component
that you can see what's going on, inspect it.
You also see you can debug runs.
What happens there?
Like obviously when you're pulling data
from many different sources,
maybe it's not your data you're taking in.
You know, fields could vanish.
It can be the wrong type.
Systems can go down.
I'm sure the debugging is interesting.
So it looks a little bit kind of like a web browser debug
dev tools thing.
- So for the record, my code never fails.
I've never had a bug in my life,
but for those of you who have.
- Yeah, well, mine doesn't either.
I only do it to make an example and for reminding me
how other, yes.
If I do it's intentional, of course.
- You get to humble myself a little bit.
- Exactly.
This view is one of my favorite.
I mean, so many favorite views,
but this is, it's actually really fun to watch.
Watch this actually run when you execute this pipeline.
But really like, let's go back to, you know,
the world before orchestrators.
We use cron, right?
We'd have a bash script that would do something
and we'd have a cron drop that said,
make sure this thing runs.
And then hopefully it was successful,
but sometimes it wasn't.
And it's a sometimes it wasn't,
that's always been the problem, right?
It's like, well, what do I do now?
How do I know why it failed?
What was, when did it fail?
You know, at what point or what steps did it fail?
That's really hard to do.
What this debugger really is,
is a structured log of every step that's been going on
through your pipeline, right?
So in this view, there's three assets
that we can kind of see here.
One is called users, one is called orders
and one is to run dbt.
But presumably there's these two, you know,
tables that are being updated
and then a dbt job, it looks like
that's being updated at the very end.
Once you execute this pipeline,
all the logs are captured from each of those assets.
So you can manually write your own logs.
You have access to a Python logger
and you can use your info, your error, whatever have you
and log output that way.
And it'll be captured in a structured way,
but it also capture logs from your integrations.
So if you're using dbt, we capture those logs as well.
You can see it processing every single asset.
So if anything does go wrong,
you can filter down and understand at what step,
at what point did something go wrong.
- That's awesome.
Just the historical aspect,
'cause just going through logs,
especially multiple systems can be really, really tricky
to figure out what actually caused this to go wrong.
But come back and say, oh, it crashed,
pull up the UI and see,
all right, well, show me what this run did,
show me what this job did.
Seems like it's a lot easier to debug
than your standard web API or something like that.
- Exactly.
You can click on any of these assets
that get that metadata that we had earlier as well.
If one step failed and it's kind of flaky,
you can just click on that one step and say,
just rerun this, everything else is fine.
We don't need to restart from scratch.
- Okay, and it'll keep the data from before
so you don't have to rerun that.
- Yeah, I mean, it depends on how you built the pipeline.
We like to build item potent pipelines
is how we sort of talk about it,
the data engineering landscape, right?
So you should be able to run something multiple times
and not break anything in a perfect world,
that's not always possible, but ideally, yes.
And so we can presume that if user is completed successfully,
then we don't have to run that again
because that data was persisted,
database S3 somewhere.
And if orders was the one that was broken,
we can just only run orders and not have to worry
about rewriting the whole thing from scratch.
- Excellent, so item potent for people who maybe don't know,
if you run it once or you perform the operation once
or you perform it 20 times,
same outcome should have side effects, right?
- That's the idea, yeah.
- That's the idea.
We can strive for it. - Easier said than done sometimes.
- It sure is.
- Sometimes it's easy, sometimes it's very hard,
but the more you can build pipelines that way,
the easier your life becomes.
- Generally, not always,
but generally true for programming as well, right?
If you talk to functional programming people,
they'll say like, it's an absolute, but.
- Yes, yes, functional programmers love this kind of stuff
and it actually does lend itself really well
to data pipelines.
Data pipelines, unlike maybe some of the software
engineering stuff, it's a little bit different
in that the data changing is what causes often
most of the headaches, right?
It's less so the actual code you write,
but more the expectations tend to change so frequently
and so often in new and novel and interesting ways
that you would often never expect.
And so the more you can sort of make that function so pure
that you can provide any sort of dataset
and really test really easily these expectations
when they get broken,
the easier it is to sort of debug these things
and build on them in the future.
- Yeah, and cache them as well.
- Yes, it's always nice.
- Yeah, so speaking of that kind of stuff,
like what's the scalability story?
If I've got some big, huge, complicated data pipeline,
can I parallelize them and have them run multiple pieces
like if there's different branches or something like that?
- Yeah, exactly, that's one of the key benefits, I think,
in writing your assets in this DAG way, right?
Anything that is parallelizable will be parallelized.
Now, sometimes you might wanna put limits on that.
Sometimes too much parallelization is bad.
Your poor little database can't handle it.
And you can say, you know,
maybe a concurrency limit on this one just for today
is worth putting on,
or if you're hitting an API for an external vendor,
they might not appreciate 10,000 requests a second
on that one, so maybe you would slow it down.
But in this-- - Or rate limiting, right?
You can run into too many requests
and then your stuff crashes, then you gotta start.
It can be a whole thing.
- It can be a whole thing.
There's memory concerns, but let's pretend the world
is simple.
Anything that can be parallelized will be through Daxter.
And that's really the benefit of writing these DAGs
is that there's a nice algorithm for determining
what that actually looks like.
- Yeah, I guess if you have a diamond shape
or any sort of split, right?
Those two things now become, 'cause it's acyclical,
they can't turn around and then eventually depend
on each other again. - Exactly.
- That's a perfect chance to just go fork it out.
- Exactly, and that's kind of where partitions
are also kind of interesting.
If you have a partitioned asset,
you could take your dataset partitioned into five buckets
and run all five partitions at once,
knowing full well that 'cause you've written this
in a idempotent and partitioned way
that the first pipeline will only operate on Apple
and the second one only operates on bananas
and there is no commingling of apples and bananas
anywhere in the pipeline.
- Oh, that's interesting.
I hadn't really thought about using the partitions
for parallelism, but of course.
- Yeah, it's a fun little way to break things apart.
- So if we run this on the Daxter cloud or even on our own,
this is pretty much automatic.
We don't have to do anything.
Like Daxter just looks at it and says,
this looks parallelizable and it'll go or?
- That's right, yeah.
As long as you've got the full deployment,
whether it's OSS or cloud,
Daxter will basically parallelize it for you
as much as possible.
- Excellent.
- You can set global currency limits.
So you might say, 64 is more than enough parallelization
that I need, or maybe I want less
because I'm worried about overloading systems,
but it's really up to you.
- I'm putting this on a $10 server, please don't.
Please don't kill it.
Just respect that it's somewhat wimpy, but that's okay.
- Yeah, it'll get the job done.
- It'll get the job done.
All right, I wanna talk about some of the tools
and some of the tools that are maybe at play here
when working with Daxter and some of the trends and stuff.
But before that, maybe speak to where
you could see people adopt a tool like Daxter,
but they generally don't.
They don't realize like, oh, actually,
there's a whole framework for this, right?
Like I could, sure, I could go and build just on HTTP server
and hook into the request and start writing to it.
But like, maybe I should use Flask or FastAPI.
Like there's these frameworks that we really naturally adopt
for certain situations like APIs and others,
background jobs, data pipelines,
where I think there's probably a good chunk of people
who could benefit from stuff like this,
but they just don't think they need a framework for it.
Like, cron is enough.
- Yeah, it's funny because sometimes cron is enough.
And I don't wanna encourage people not to use cron,
but think twice, at least is what I would say.
So probably the first like trigger for me of thinking of,
is Daxter a good choice?
Is like, am I trying to ingest data from somewhere?
'Cause that's something that fails.
Like, I think we just can accept that,
if you're moving data around,
the data source will break, the expectations will change,
you will need to debug it, you'll need to rerun it.
And doing that in cron is a nightmare.
So I would say definitely start to think about
an orchestration system if you're ingesting data.
If you have a simple cron job that sends one email,
like you're probably fine.
I don't think you need to implement all of Daxter
just to do that.
But the more closer you get to data pipelining,
I think the better your life will be,
if you're not trying to debug a obtuse process
that no one really understands six months from now.
- Excellent.
All right, maybe we could touch on some of the tools
that are interesting to see people using.
You talked about DUPDB and DBT,
a lot of Ds starting here,
but give us a sense of like some of the supporting tools
you see a lot of folks using that are interesting.
- Yeah, for sure.
I think in the data space,
probably DBT is one of the most popular choices.
And DBT, in many ways,
it's nothing more than a command line tool
that runs a bunch of SQL in a DAG as well.
So it was actually a nice fit with Daxter and DBT together.
DBT is really used by people who are trying to model
that business process using SQL
against typically a data warehouse.
So if you have your data in, for example,
a Postgres, a Snowflake, Databricks, Microsoft SQL,
these types of data warehouses,
generally you're trying to model
some type of business process.
And typically people use SQL to do that.
Now you can do this without DBT,
but DBT has provided a nice clean interface to doing so.
It makes it very easy to connect these models together,
to run them, to have a development workflow
that works really well.
And then you can push it to prod
and have things run again in production.
So that's DBT.
We find it works really well.
And a lot of our customers are actually using DBT as well.
There's DuckDB, which is a great,
it's like the SQL light for columnar databases, right?
It's in process, it's fast, it's written by the Dutch.
There's nothing you can't like about it.
It's free. We love that.
- It feels very comfortable in Python itself.
- It does. It's so easy.
Yeah, exactly.
The Dutch have given us so much
and they've asked nothing of us.
So I'm always very thankful for them.
It's fast. It's so fast.
It's like, if you've ever used pandas
for processing large volumes of data,
you've occasionally hit memory limits
or inefficiencies in doing these large aggregates.
I won't go into all the reasons of why that is,
but DuckDB sort of changes that
because it's a fast serverless
sort of C++ written tooling
to do really fast vectorized work.
And by that, I mean, like it works on columns.
So typically in like SQL light, you're doing transactions.
You're doing single row updates, writes, inserts,
and SQL light is great at that.
Where typical transactional databases fail
or aren't as powerful is when you're doing aggregates,
when you're looking at an entire column, right?
Just the way they're architected.
If you want to know the average, the median,
the sum of some large number of columns,
and you want to group that by a whole bunch of things,
you want to know the first date someone did something
and the last one,
those types of vectorized operations,
DuckDB is really, really fast at doing.
And it's a great alternative to, for example, pandas,
which can often hit memory limits
and be a little bit slow in that regard.
- Yeah, it looks like it has some pretty cool aspects,
transactions, of course,
but it also says direct parquet, CSV, and JSON querying.
So if you've got a CSV file hanging around
and you want to ask questions about it,
or JSON or some of the data science stuff through parquet,
turn a indexed proper query engine against it.
Don't just use a dictionary or something, right?
- Yeah, it's great for reading a CSV, zip files,
tar files, parquets, partition parquet files,
all that stuff that usually was really annoying
to do and operate on,
you can now install DuckDB.
It's kind of great CLI too.
So before you go out and like program your entire pipeline,
you just run DuckDB and you can start writing SQL
against CSV files and all this stuff
to really understand your data
and just really see how quick it is.
I used it on a bird dataset that I had
as an example project.
And there was millions of rows
and I was joining them together
and doing massive group buys.
And it was done in like seconds.
And it was just hard for me to believe
that it was even correct,
'cause it was so quick.
So it's wonderful.
- I must have done that wrong somehow.
'Cause it's done, it shouldn't be done.
Yeah, and the fact it's in process
means there's not a server for you to babysit,
patch, make sure it's still running.
It's accessible, but not too accessible, all that, right?
- It's a pip install away,
which is always, we love that, right?
- Yeah, absolutely.
You mentioned, or I guess I mentioned Parquet,
but also Apache Arrow seems like it's making its way
into a lot of different tools
and sort of foundational,
sort of high memory,
high performance in memory processing.
Have you used this, Eddie?
- I've used it, especially through,
like working through different languages.
So moving data between Python and R
is where I last used this.
And Arrow's great at that.
I believe Arrow is like the,
underneath some of the Rust to Python as well.
It's working there.
So typically I don't use Arrow like directly myself,
but it's in many of the tooling I use.
It's a great product.
And like so much of the ecosystem is now built on Arrow.
- Yeah, I think a lot of it is,
I feel like the first time I heard about it
was through Polars.
- That's right.
- Yeah, I'm pretty sure,
which is another Rust story for kind of like Pandas,
but a little bit more fluent, lazy API.
- Yes.
We live in such great times, to be honest.
So Polars is a,
Python bindings for Rust, I believe,
is kind of how I think about it.
It does all the transformation in Rust,
but you've had this Python interface to it.
And it makes things again, incredibly fast.
I would say similar in speed to DuckDP.
They both are quite comparable sometimes.
- Yeah, it also claims to have vectorized
and column runner processing and all that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, it's pretty incredible.
So not a drop-in replacement for Pandas,
but if you have the opportunity to use it
and you don't need to use the full breadth
of what Pandas offers,
'cause Pandas is quite a huge package.
There's a lot it does.
But if you're just doing simple transforms,
I think Polars is a great option to explore.
- Yeah, I talked to Richie Vink,
Vink who was part of that.
And I think they explicitly chose
to not try to make it a drop-in replacement for Pandas,
but tried to choose an API
that would allow the engine to be smarter.
And go like, I see you're asking for this,
but the step before you wanted this other thing,
so let me do that transformation all in one shot.
And a little bit like a query optimization engine.
- Yep.
- Yeah, what else is out there?
We got time for just a couple more.
If there's anything that you're like,
oh yeah, people use this all the time.
Obviously the databases you've said,
Postgres, Snowflake, et cetera.
- Yeah, there's so much.
So another little one I like, it's called DLT, DLT Hub.
It's getting a lot of attraction as well.
And what I like about it is how lightweight it is.
I'm such a big fan of lightweight tooling.
That's not massive frameworks.
Loading data is I think still kind of yucky in many ways.
It's not fun.
And DLT makes it a little bit simpler and easier to do so.
So that's one I would recommend people just to look into
if you got to either ingest data from some API,
some website, some CSV file.
It's a great way to do that.
- It claims it's the Python library
for data teams loading data into unexpected places.
Very interesting.
- Yes, that's great.
- Yeah, this looks cool.
All right, well, I guess maybe let's talk about,
let's talk business and then we can talk about what's next
and then we'll probably be out of time.
I'm always fascinated.
I think there's starting to be a bit of a blueprint for this,
but companies that take a thing, they make it
and they give it away and then they have a company around it.
And congratulations to you all for doing that, right?
And a lot of it seems to kind of center
around the open core model,
which I don't know if that's exactly
how you would characterize yourself,
but maybe just talk about the business side.
'Cause I know there's many successful open source projects
that don't necessarily result in full-time jobs
or companies if people were to want that.
- Yeah, it's a really interesting place.
And I don't think it's one that anyone
has truly figured out well,
I can say this is the way forward for everyone,
but it is something we're trying.
And I think for Dexter, I think it's working pretty well.
And what I think is really powerful about Dexter
is like the open source product is really, really good.
And it hasn't really been limited in many ways
in order to drive like cloud product consumption.
We really believe that there's actual value
in that separation of these things.
There are some things that we just can't do
in the open source platform.
For example, there's pipelines on cloud that involve
ingesting data through our own systems
in order to do reporting,
which just doesn't make sense to do
on the open source system.
It makes the product way too complex.
But for the most part, I think Dexter open source,
we really believe that like just getting it
in the hands of developers is the best way
to prove the value of it.
And if we can build a business on top of that,
I think we're all super happy to do so.
It's nice that we get to sort of drive both sides of it.
To me, that's like one of the more exciting parts, right?
A lot of the development that we do in Dexter open source
is driven by people who are paid through,
what happens on Dexter cloud.
And I think from what I can tell,
there's no better way to build open source product
than to have people who are adequately paid
to develop that product.
Otherwise it can be a labor of love,
but one that doesn't last for very long.
- Yeah, whenever I think about building software,
there's like 80% of it that's super exciting and fun,
10% and then there's that little sliver
of like really fine polish,
that if it's not just your job to make that thing polished,
you're just for the most part,
just not gonna polish that bit, right?
- It's tough, UI, design, support.
There's all these things that go into making a software
like really extraordinary.
That's really, really tough to do.
And I think I really like the open source business model.
I think for me being able to just try something,
not having talked to sales
and being able to just deploy locally and test it out
and see if this works.
And if I choose to do so, deploy it in production,
or if I bought the cloud product
and I don't like the direction that I was going,
I can even go open source as well.
That's pretty compelling to me.
- Yeah, for sure it is.
And I think the more moving pieces of infrastructure,
more uptime you want and all those types of things,
the more somebody who's maybe a programmer,
but not a DevOps infrastructure person,
but needs to have it there, right?
Like that's an opportunity as well, right?
For you to say, look, you can write the code.
We made it cool for you to write the code,
but you don't have to get notified
when the server's down or whatever.
Like, we'll just take care of that for you.
That's pretty awesome.
- Yeah, and it's efficiencies of scale as well, right?
Like we've learned the same mistakes over and over again,
so you don't have to, which is nice.
I don't know how many people who want to maintain servers,
but people do, and they're more than welcome to
if that's how they choose to do so.
- Yeah, for sure.
All right, we're just about out of time.
Let's close up our conversation
with where are things going for Dagster?
Like what's on the roadmap?
What are you excited about?
- Oh, that's a good one.
I think we've actually published our roadmap online
somewhere if you search Dagster roadmap,
it's probably out there.
I think for the most part,
that hasn't changed much going into 2024,
though we may update it.
Ah, there it is.
We're really just doubling down on what we've built already.
I think there's a lot of work we can do
on the product itself to make it easier to use,
easier to understand.
My team specifically is really focused
around the education piece.
And so we launched Dagster University's first module,
which helps you really understand the core,
like concepts around Dagster.
Our next module is coming up in a couple months,
and that'll be around using Dagster with dbt,
which is our most popular integration.
We're building up more integrations as well.
So I built a little integration called embedded ELT
that makes it easy to ingest data.
But I wanna actually build an integration
with DLT as well, DLT hub.
So we'll be doing that.
And there's more coming down the pipe,
but I don't know how much I can say.
Look forward to an event in April
where we'll have a launch event on all that's coming.
- Nice.
Is that an online thing people can attend
or something like that? - Exactly.
Yeah, there'll be some announcement there
on the Dagster website on that.
Maybe I will call it one thing that's actually really fun.
It's called Dagster Open Platform.
It's a GitHub repo that we launched a couple months ago,
I wanna say.
And we took our internal,
I should go back one more, sorry.
It's like GitHub, Dagster Open Platform and GitHub.
- I have it somewhere.
- Yeah, if you go.
- It's here under the organization.
- Yes, it should be somewhere in here.
There it is, Dagster Open Platform on GitHub.
And it's really a clone of our production pipelines
for the most part.
There's some things we've chosen to ignore
because they're sensitive,
but as much as possible,
we've defaulted to making it public and open.
And the whole reason behind this was because,
as data engineers, it's often hard to see
how other data engineers write code.
We get to see how software engineers write code quite often,
but most people don't wanna share their data platforms
for various good reasons.
- Well, also, there's smaller teams or maybe just one person.
And then those pipelines are so integrated
into your specific infrastructure, right?
So it's not like, well, here's a web framework to share.
Here's how we integrate into that one weird API
that we have that no one else has.
So it's no point in publishing it to you, right?
- That's typically how it goes,
or they're so large that they're afraid
that there's some important information
that they just don't wanna take the risk on.
So we built something that's in the middle
where we've taken as much as we can and we've publicized it.
And you can't run this on your own.
That's not the point.
The point is to look at the code and see,
how does Dagster use Dagster
and what does that look like?
- Nice, okay.
All right, well, I'll put a link to that in the show notes
and people can check it out.
- Appreciate it.
- Yeah, I guess let's wrap it up with the final call
to action people are interested in Dagster.
How do they get started?
What do you tell them?
- Oh yeah, dagster.io is probably the greatest place to start.
You can try the cloud product.
We have free self-serve
or you can try the local install as well.
If you get stuck, a great place to join is our Slack channel
which is up on our website.
There's even a Ask AI channel
where you can just talk to a Slack bot
that's been trained on all our GitHub issues and discussions
and it's surprisingly good at walking you through,
any debugging, any issues or even advice.
- That's pretty excellent actually.
- Yeah, it's real fun.
It's really fun.
And if that doesn't work, we're also there in the community
where you can just chat to us as well.
- Cool, all right.
Well, Pedram, thank you for being on the show.
Thanks for all the work on Dagster and sharing it with us.
- Thank you, Michael.
- You bet, see you later.
[getthequad.com/gradschools/podcast]